many people say that you should
prioritize your mental health above all
else and it's a beguiling lis simple
dictum whatever it is you aspire to do
in life presumably you can't do it if
you're crazy whatever it is you want to
enjoy in life presumably you can't enjoy
it if your actual ability to think and
perceive reality is impaired and if this
impairment is something that is within
your power to cure or solve then
presumably you should first cure or
solve it makes sense seems like like
such a simple dictum uh what what is
mental health I think it's interesting
that this sort of slogan which might
suggest that you um you should be less
self-indulgent ends up being an excuse
for even being even more self
intelligent like oh well if you need to
drink alcohol to make yourself feel good
then you should make alcohol for the
sake of your mental health if you need a
vacation to make yourself feel good then
you should prioritize the vacation for
the sake of mental health and we had
this discussion about another vegan
youtuber put a natural vegan she was
taking antidepressant drugs during
pregnancy SSRI drugs that we know they
do damage to the health of the mother
they also do damage to healthy unborn
child and we got to hear all the excuses
from people who said no no no you should
prioritize your mental health many years
ago I saw the same debates about
marijuana and people justifying smoking
marijuana during pregnancy certainly in
Canada I've heard it about women during
alcohol during pregnancy quote unquote
prioritize your mental health I think if
we were really having a sincere and
thoroughgoing discussion of what mental
health means
we'd have to say that drinking a
neurotoxin like alcohol is not mentally
healthy um feeling that you rely on a
poison and in toxification that the
brain toxicity achieved by drinking that
that poison for your for your mental
health for your equanimity for your
moods for your you know for your self
perceived sanity it is can't possibly be
be healthy so you know to quote Marcus
Aurelius once again we are debating for
no ordinary prize we are debating for
whether we are to be sane or insane I
had a year and a half of my life here in
three months in Scotland though those
people back then maybe Scotland's change
people tell me Scotland has changed but
um you know to drink alcohol four days a
week
is it sane or insane that the the
Scottish idea of sobriety
at that time in Glasgow Scotland you
know was alcoholism oh um yeah the
Scottish idea of food and health and
diet it was it was unbelievable was it
was cartoonish but if you live in a
society of alcoholics if you live in a
society where it's reassured and you're
told again and again this is normal and
natural and necessary and will make you
feel good about yourself and oh come on
it'll it'll do you good it'll set you
right it'll help you think clearly it'll
help you calm down what what in that
context is mentally healthy and isn't it
in fact a strangely defiant thing you
have to do to stand up against that
tradition in that cultural context and
say no I for my part I'm not gonna drink
alcohol I'm gonna refuse this even if
I'm the only person who's sober in
Glasgow Scotland you know even if you
know even if everyone perceives me as
sick and strange and you know I know I
know it may sound like a joke to you
guys but it's not that's that's
basically my situation with video games
but I come on the internet and make
youtube videos talking about the
importance of not playing video games as
an adult you know still still to this
day I still get hate mail I just got
more mail today some of its really
book-length explain to me how no-no-no
I'm wrong but I was supposedly you know
and yes some of them sent me statistics
that video games they now are the
world's most popular hobby in the
world's most popular pastime yeah and
probably if you multiply the the number
of people playing video games by the
number of hours they spend playing video
games they probably spend more time
doing that than any other hobby because
even people go skiing most of them don't
spend that much time skiing as the
people thing but yeah I'm the one person
who's gonna stand up in my culture and
say no you know there's a difference
between a toy and a tool and when we're
children we play with toys and when
we're adults we try to do meaningful
things with with tools obviously a
pencil can be a toy or a tool it's how
you use it and a computer can be a toy
or a tool it's how you use it I got this
email from a 25 year old man and he
talks about his political education as
political aspirations and his struggle
with autism he's been diagnosed with
autism formally and you know he admits
that he's been on SSRI drugs
antidepressants since the age of 16 and
I'll just quote him verbatim here he
says quote he is a weakened alcoholic he
can go months without drinking but he
always falls back he gets very drunk
once a week he uses alcohol as a way to
stop thinking he has a constant
narration going on in his head and then
he's drinking alcohol to to plot it so
close close quote if you guys know I've
been sober basically since 19 or 20 or
something I mean exactly oh really my
drinking was like it ever in 16 17
I drank a few times since then but I I
quit early but I can I can relate to
this I really can for me really the only
thing that was interesting or rewarding
about drinking alcohol was you could say
the negation of consciousness was of
blotting out and blacking out of
consciousness
indeed the suicide like quality of
drinking and and feeling your your
thoughts stop and there's no way that
can be mentally healthy now he comments
he has a constant narration going on is
it but it's not always unpleasant is it
when your life is miserable when your
life is unhappy when you're dwelling on
unhappy things when you feel the
narration in your head is something you
have to escape that's when it's
unpleasant when you're consumed with
thoughts of something a problem you're
trying to solve or history or politics
like you find rewarding it's thing you
find interesting something you find
meaningful then you don't mind your
thoughts being a constant narration but
it's not it's not the narration itself
that's the problem right it's what's
being being narrated so if this guy has
been on antidepressant drugs for nine
years it's very likely you'll have very
serious side effects
one quitting antidepressants if he's
become emotionally dependent on alcohol
which is what he's describing you know
he's not an alcoholic and something
needs to drink every day but he is
emotionally dependent alcohol then
quitting alcohol is gonna be very very
hard to do in some ways a lot of
indications here of positive potential
for the future as a political leader and
veganism when someone who just cares
about law history politics participating
a parliament in his in his country of
origin
but this comes back to the first promise
of the video can you really enjoy
anything in life without your mental
health
can you really pursue a goal or
accomplish anything in life without your
mental health now the problem is as I've
already mentioned the people define
mental health to mean their own
self-indulgence
and I will obviate this problem by
restating the same slogan in slightly
more precise terms can you enjoy
anything in this life without self
discipline can you accomplish your goals
in this life without self-discipline
it's really self discipline we're
talking about and not mental health and
self-discipline just like mental health
in my opinion is radically and
fundamentally incompatible with being
dependent on alcohol with being
dependent on antidepressants especially
given what we now know a scientific fact
about what their effects are and what
they are not now I make this video at a
very interesting time in our lives and
in my relationship with my girlfriend
because my girlfriend just went through
a brief period in which she convinced
herself that she ought to quit all of
her medication that she ought to be able
to regenerate her physical health you
know what I think I think keeping it all
a real part of your optimism vote that
was your relatively positive experience
with reclaiming your own mental health
you can put it that way or your own self
discipline really that's what sorry in
your case that's it's perfect that's
what we really mean so she's mentioned
on her own youtube channel she discussed
this a little bit but she my girlfriend
has a history with antidepressants
she has history with marijuana
specifically basically no other drug
just just marijuana
but again marijuana causes brain damage
marijuana changes how you feel and how
you think and the type of emotional
dependency marijuana produces it may be
invisible to the people who are
themselves dependent on it but it's very
real I've since I was a teenager I've
said that marijuana was the most
dangerous of drugs because it makes
intolerable things tolerable even when I
was a little teenager like 15 16 17 I
saw there would be people and they hate
their job and they hate their roommate
this is Toronto so everyone at it
roommate no one at their own apartment
everyone was sharing they hate their job
they hate their roommate they hate their
family they maybe they hate living in
Toronto or whatever and you know there's
so many things they hate and they would
smoke marijuana every night and
intolerable things became tolerable and
things they wanted to change would have
an impetus and a motivation to change
that week that month that year instead
went on unchanged for years and years
SIA Melissa had a relatively positive
experience getting motivated by my
channel and then getting motivated by
getting to know me and falling in love
with me to really kind of reclaim her
self discipline I think nobody can
define mental health so it's but you
know certainly taking taking a step for
it that way and she adapted to living a
completely sober lifestyle and a
lifestyle I mean you know she's been
highly driven highly motivated to learn
new things and to grow as a person even
when there was nothing in particular she
was trying to learn or become you know
it's worth pointing out you haven't had
like a single career ambition or focus
but you have nevertheless been focused
in the things you apply yourself to in
your life and you know we're lucky cuz
it turns out she's got a talent for the
Chinese language which she's been
applying herself to lately
but you know what physical health
problems they are beyond their beyond
the reach they're beyond the scope of
what self-discipline can do for you
right with self-discipline you can learn
to cope better with autism and it sounds
like this young man in many ways he's
already way ahead there is doing pretty
well but you know so if this one can
never rehearse autism it can never cure
autism it can just help you cope better
self discipline can help you cope with
having only one leg I mean a really
simple physical condition and you know
Melissa you've now had the process
unlike your experience quitting
SSRIs unlike your experience quitting
antidepressants your experience quitting
marijuana
Melissa's experience quitting drugs that
feed it treated or physical health which
she did to some extent with a lot of
encouragement and optimism from Nina and
Iran and another clear skin diet the
idea that by having a more it's it's
really about this of what the idea that
by having a more disciplined diet you
were gonna you know you were gonna solve
these other problems in your life in
your body
you've instead had the kind of question
reminder that no no it's in some ways we
like to say that the mind and the body
are one but the mind is the mind and the
body is the body and there was only so
much the self discipline can do for you
physically with medically real medically
real conditions and autism is a
medically real condition whereas
depression is not even though it may
seem the the realest thing in the world
to you it may seem all-consuming
overwhelming you know the depression is
not and the treatment of depression with
SSRIs asthma discussed at great length
on this channel it's not so look this
guy wrote to me he's not really asking
me any questions I think he's already
got the right questions and I think he
already he already has the answers even
so you know I think the only thing you
can really hear from
want to hear from me is that I
sympathize but he says he's just about
to finish the degrees currently enrolled
in university I think you can have
absolutely no higher priority than your
own sobriety brutally as honest as that
and he mentions a lot of other things in
his life just people he can't get along
with and stuff well if you can't get
along with them drunk you tell me maybe
you're gonna get along with them even
worse when you're so I think you
absolutely have to make your top
priority quitting the mind-altering
drugs you're currently accustomed to
shall we say and you know that there's
probably no way to really prepare
yourself for the struggle that involves
you know what let's let's keep it over
real you know some Melissa I've been
through this with my girlfriend
in real time part of her struggle with
this sobriety this absolute sobriety and
me until tomorrow like Western cultural
standard she already was sober
nobody considered her a drunk or a
STONER and we're close to her own
parents had no idea she smoked marijuana
she wasn't perceived as you know a
STONER or no one perceived the
antidepressant Pro but you know what
most you know what I've seen with you
part of your struggle in the last two
years has just been facing up to what
kind of a person you really are or what
kind of a person you really were I think
the drugs you used even though they're
considered soft drugs made it easier for
you to deceive yourself about what kind
of person you are and being really sober
all the time and being self examining
and having nowhere to run you know I
mean like you're always seeing yourself
in the mirror you know what I mean
always knowing who you are and knowing
why you did things you know what you
said and what you meant to say and you
didn't quite say that and what what you
were feeling and then reflecting on that
and then
towards like if you're a jerk knowing
exactly how why you're a jerk and having
no refuge from that reality no refuge
from the narration in your mind that's
been really hard for you to deal with
that's been a kind of second coming into
adulthood for you and last in the last
couple of years and I can imagine you
know for this for this young man if you
really quit drinking and quits the quits
the mind-altering drugs you know one of
the one of the most sobering experiences
of all is recognizing who you really are
but hey guess what there's good news
we're all malleable not infinitely
malleable but malleable you know I've
had periods in my life where I did math
everyday complex math and you change you
adapt now I haven't done math in so many
years you know it's it's very slow
my appearance my life where I was
thinking in and speaking in lotion every
day and just yesterday i sat there with
a lotion phrase book in the bookstore
and looked at it wow I haven't thought
in or spoken that language again and
elements of your character that you
exercise or leave in abeyance you can
develop you can become in appreciable
and significant ways a different person
above all morally ethically you know
that's that's within your grasp in terms
of self discipline what you care about
and how much you care and how you
express that care those things can
change you know the in many in many ways
the aesthetics of who you are and what
have a person you are they they really
can't change but yeah if you don't
really have the experience of sobriety
as an adult because for him yeah age 16
to 25 you know yeah you're in for a
series of rude awakenings
and probably a struggle both with
recognizing who you are and with
figuring out what kind of person you
aspire to be
and how to day-by-day cope with that gap